One common argument against public transit expansions into suburbia is that better transit will enable urban criminals to visit suburbia more easily and commit more crimes; a related argument is that any non-sprawl development is crimogenic because compactness allows crime to migrate from neighborhood to neighborhood more easily.  The commonsense response to this argument is that there is no correlation between crime and transit use or density; the nation’s most dangerous cities are not the most transit-friendly or those with the best public transit.  For example, Boston (over 13,000 residents per square mile, 25 percent of commuters using public transit) had 4.7 murders per 100,000 residents and Oklahoma City (1145 people per square mile, 1 percent of workers using public transit) had 6.4. New York City had fewer murders than either city (4.3 per 100,000).

When I point these facts out, the common response I get runs something like this: “Yes, but [my spread-out Sun Belt city) only has its crime in a few bad neighborhoods, while cities like New York have crime everywhere”. Until recently, there was no way to judge the validity of this argument.

However, thanks to the creators of the American Violence (americanviolence.org) website, we do have a way to judge this argument to some extent.  The American Violence site lists homicides, fatal shootings, and nonfatal shootings for many American cities, and even has data by census tract for shootings (though not for homicides or other crimes).  So we can see whether shootings were more concentrated in a few neighborhoods for any particular type of city.

For example, Boston had 90 nonfatal shootings in 2023.* If crime was evenly spread out throughout Boston’s neighborhoods, we would find that each of these shootings was in a different tract.  On the other hand, if crime was all in one neighborhood, we would find that every single shooting was in one census tract.  As it happens, there were shootings in 42 of Boston’s census tracts (21 percent of its 207 tracts).  The worst 10 percent of these tracts (that is, the four with the most shootings) collectively had 29, or 32 percent of the city’s shootings.  The worst 20 percent (the eight with the most shootings) had 42, or 47 percent of the shootings. 

