---
layout:     post
title:      SLAM
date:       2021-01-11
summary:    SLAM robotics
categories: SLAM ROBOTICS
---

Robotic systems can be classified into two different categories - holonomic and non-holonomic. Holonomic systems can be defined as systems where every constraint depends exclusively on the current pose and time, and not on any derivatives with respect to time. Nonholonomic systems, on the other hand, are dependent on derivatives. Path planning for nonholonomic systems is more difficult due to the added constraints.


In SLAM, the gradient descent, Levenberg-Marquardt, and conjugate gradient algorithms are quite common. A brief summary of gradient descent and the others below:


Recall that the gradient of a function is a vector that points in the direction of the greatest rate of change; or in the case of an extrema, is equal to zero.

In gradient descent - you make an initial guess, and then adjust it incrementally in the direction opposite the gradient. Eventually, you should reach a minimum of the function.

This algorithm does have a shortcoming - in complex distributions, the initial guess can change the end result significantly. Depending on the initial guess, the algorithm converges on two different local minima. The algorithm has no way to determine where the global minimum is - it very naively moves down the steepest slope, and when it reaches a local minima, it considers its task complete. One solution to this problem is to use stochastic gradient descent (SGD), an iterative method of gradient descent using subsamples of data.

