By any scientific standard, the Human Genome Project was enormous: it involved billions of dollars of funding, dozens of institutions, and over a decade of accelerated research. But that was only the tip of the iceberg. Long before the project began, scientists were hard at work assembling the intricate science of human genetics. And most of the time, they were not studying humans. The foundational discoveries in genetics centered on far simpler organisms such as peas, molds, fruit flies, and mice. To this day, biologists use these simpler organisms as genetic “minimal working examples” in order to save time, energy, and money. A well-designed experiment with Drosophilia, such as Feany and Bender (2000), can teach us an astonishing amount about humans.

The deep learning analogue of Drosophilia is the MNIST dataset. A large number of deep learning innovations including dropout, Adam, convolutional networks, generative adversarial networks, and variational autoencoders began life as MNIST experiments. Once these innovations proved themselves on small-scale experiments, scientists found ways to scale them to larger and more impactful applications.
<br>
They key advantage of Drosophilia and MNIST is that they dramatically accelerate the iteration cycle of exploratory research. In the case of Drosophilia, the fly’s life cycle is just a few days long and its nutritional needs are negligible. This makes it much easier to work with than mammals, especially humans. In the case of MNIST, training a strong classifier takes a few dozen lines of code, less than a minute of walltime, and negligible amounts of electricity. This is a stark contrast to state-of-the-art vision, text, and game-playing models which can take months and hundreds of thousands of dollars of electricity to train.
<br>
Yet in spite of its historical significance, MNIST has three notable shortcomings. First, it does a poor job of differentiating between linear, nonlinear, and translation-invariant models. For example, logistic, MLP, and CNN benchmarks obtain 94, 99+, and 99+% accuracy on it. This makes it hard to measure the contribution of a CNN’s spatial priors or to judge the relative effectiveness of different regularization schemes. Second, it is somewhat large for a toy dataset. Each input example is a 784-dimensional vector and thus it takes a non-trivial amount of computation to perform hyperparameter searches or debug a metalearning loop. Third, MNIST is hard to hack. The ideal toy dataset should be procedurally generated so that researchers can smoothly vary parameters such as background noise, translation, and resolution.
<br>
In order to address these shortcomings, we propose the MNIST-1D dataset. It is a minimalist, low-memory, and low-compute alternative to MNIST, designed for exploratory deep learning research where rapid iteration is a priority. Training examples are 20 times smaller but they are still better at measuring the difference between 1) linear and nonlinear classifiers and 2) models with and without spatial inductive biases (eg. translation invariance). The dataset is procedurally generated but still permits analogies to real-world digit classification.
## EXAMPLES

In this section we will explore several examples of how MNIST-1D can be used to study core “science of deep learning” phenomena.

Finding lottery tickets. It is not unusual for deep learning models to have ten or even a hundred times more parameters than necessary. This overparameterization helps training but increases computational overhead. One solution is to progressively prune weights from a model during training so that the final network is just a fraction of its original size. Although this approach works, conventional wisdom holds that sparse networks do not train well from scratch. Recent work by Frankle & Carbin (2019) challenges this conventional wisdom. The authors report finding sparse subnetworks inside of larger networks that train to equivalent or even higher accuracies. These “lottery ticket” subnetworks can be found through a simple iterative procedure: train a network, prune the smallest weights, and then rewind the remaining weights to their original initializations and retrain.

Since the original paper was published, a multitude of works have sought to explain this phenomenon and then harness it on larger datasets and models. However, very few works have attempted to isolate a “minimal working example” of this effect so as to investigate it more carefully. The figure below shows that the MNIST-1D dataset not only makes this possible, but also enables us to elucidate, via carefully-controlled experiments, some of the reasons for a lottery ticket’s success. Unlike many follow-up experiments on the lottery ticket, this one took just two days of researcher time to produce. The curious reader can also reproduce these results in their browser in a few minutes.

