Hinge, one of the hottest dating apps out there, differentiates itself from its rivals like Tinder or Bumble by building a ‘like’ system similar to Instagram which allows its users to ‘like’ another user’s posts or photos, instead of doing simple arbitrary swipe left/right for someone’s entire profile. This article discusses how the Gale–Shapley algorithm, an algorithm that solves The Stable Marriage Problem has been applied to Hinge’s platform. The parallel it draws between how Hinge first compiles a front page for you with people that the algorithm finds most compatible with you and how the show Love Island populate a room full of men and women picking from each other points straight out how the algorithm has been implemented on the front end. In this scenario, as the article discussed, users are identified by the system as different ‘types. The more you are drawn to a ‘type’ and like their posts, the more the system on Hinge will push forwards this certain type of user profiles and content for you to see if they would be someone you like. At the meantime, your preferences set up for your account also plays a big part in helping the algorithm to find the right ones for you.

 

While both user preferences and the likes sent play a part in the matching process, the algorithm that Hinge used is still crucially depending on the preferences each user has. Just like what we learned in class, a stable marriage contains two individual who both prefer one another, Hinge is always trying to have their users reach that state of stable preferences which could lead to a stable and happy relationship. Its dealbreaker option that allows you to set into certain preferences is a perfect illustration for this: it will never show you users who doesn’t match with you ‘dealbreaker’ preferences. For example, if the height you preferred is a dealbreaker, then it will never show you users who does not fall into your preferred height range. There are other features too like the ‘We Met’ and prompts that all play into implementing the Gale–Shapley algorithm more successfully. Essentially, this classic matching algorithm from the 60s enables users nowadays to better pursue their love interests and relationships digitally online in a highly effective way.
