---
layout:     post
title:      XBOX CPU
date:       2022-06-13
summary:    Hardware issues are now the bottleneck
categories: xbox cpu
---

The new CPU partner
In a turn of events, IBM agreed to share its IP and to design a new multi-core processor, and so the Xbox 360’s CPU supplier became IBM. Although, you may remember this was the same IBM that already signed an agreement with Sony and Toshiba to produce the Playstation’s 3 CPU (‘Cell’). Apparently, IBM assumed Microsoft was not aware of the Cell project [3] and their current contract with Sony didn’t forbid them to sell to third parties.

All three companies [IBM, Toshiba and Sony]… legally all had rights to go and put any of that technology, any of those processor cores into other spaces. (…) It is very common to develop an interesting, leading-edge new technology and then utilize that technology across multiple platforms. (…) I guess what everyone didn’t anticipate was – before we even got done with the Cell chip and PS3 product – that we’d be showing this off specifically to a competitor. [4]

– David Shippy, chief architect of the Power Processing Unit (PPU)

Ironically, as of 2022, IBM’s PowerPC chips have vanished from both desktop computers and video consoles, maybe this set a bad precedent and greatly affected IBM’s trust in future businesses? I’m afraid I don’t know the answer to that.

To sum it up, IBM signed an agreement with Sony and Toshiba to develop Cell in 2001. Two years later, in 2003, IBM agreed to supply Microsoft with a new low-powered multi-core CPU. Microsoft’s CPU will be called Xenon and will inherit part of Cell’s technology, with extra input from Microsoft (focusing on multi-core homogenous computing and bespoke security). Also, while IBM would brand Cell with its ‘BladeCenter’ line of servers, Xenon could only be fitted on an Xbox 360 motherboard.

Cell’s half-sibling
Now that we positioned Microsoft and IBM in the map, let’s talk about the new CPU. This is how Xenon materialised at the end of the Xbox 360 project:

CPU!
