Huge & comprehensive study on the impacts of cash transfers (UBI) in the US finds almost no impact on everything tested - Work, Education, Health 😔.

They gave 1,000 low income people in IL and TX $1,000/mo for 3 years, & gave a control group $50/mo... They studied everything - did blood draws, had a custom mobile app to study time usage, had credit reports/bank balances.

The $12,000/yr was substantial - a 40% increase in household income, and not taxable.

# What happened?
## Work:
-People worked a little less (2% decrease in labor market participation, labor hour reduction of 1.3-1.4 hrs/wk), decreasing their non-transfer incomes. Every $1 transferred reduced household income by $0.20.
-They spend that time on leisure
-No impact on starting or helping to start a business :( though people stated on the survey that they would be more likely to start a business
-so... the negative effect on labor supply was not offset by other productive activities and people also did not get better jobs

## Education:
-people in their 20s getting the transfer had a 2% increase in enrolling in post-secondary education

## Health:
-The cash generated major benefits to stress and mental health in the 1st year but by the 2nd year there was no improvement noticed over base
-People used more medical care ($20/mo) - spending more on hospitalizations, ER, dentists. 
-People also spent more on alcohol and painkillers
-Overall there was no effect on physical health (measured via survey, blood tests, health records)
-No impact on exercise or sleep
-There were major benefits to food insecurity, but only in the 1st year. By year 2, participants were as food-insecure as before the transfers. 
Paper->https://public.websites.umich.edu/~mille/ORUS_Health.pdf

