
Recently, getting transformers  has grown much harder to come by. The demand for transformers has spiked worldwide, and so the wait time to get a new transformer has doubled from 50 weeks in 2021 to nearly two years now, according to a report from Wood MacKenzie, an energy-analytics firm. The wait for the more specialized large power transformers (LPTs), which step up voltage from power stations to transmission lines, is up to four years. Costs have also climbed by 60 to 80 percent since 2020.

About five years ago, engineers grew worried that transformer shortages would postpone their solar projects from coming online, so he began ordering transformers years before they’d actually be needed. Silicon Ranch, based in Nashville, now has a pipeline of custom transformers to make sure supply chain problems don’t stall its solar projects.

USA is not alone in this problem . A quarter of the world’s renewable-energy projects may be delayed while awaiting transformers to connect them to local grids, according to the Wood MacKenzie report. In India, the wait for 220-kilovolt transformers has leaped from 8 to 14 months, potentially holding up nearly 150 gigawatts of new solar development.


And it’s not just renewable-energy projects. The transformer shortage touches utilities, homeowners, businesses, rail systems, EV charging stations—anyone needing a grid connection. In Clallam County, the part of Washington state where the Twilight movies are set, officials in May 2022 began to deny new home-construction requests because they couldn’t get enough pad-mounted transformers to step down voltage to homes. To address the backlog of customers who had already paid for new electrical service, the utility scrounged up refurbished transformers, or “ranch runners,” which helped but likely won’t last as long as new ones.

The ripple effects of the shortage touch both public policy and safety. When a transformer fails from wear and tear, gets hit by a storm, or is damaged by war or sabotage, the inability to quickly replace it increases the risk of a power outage. The European Green Deal, which plans for an enormous build-out of Europe’s transmission network by 2030 to accelerate electrification, is imperiled by the protracted wait times for transformers, says Joannes Laveyne, an electrical engineer and energy-systems expert at Ghent University, in Belgium.

For power engineers, this crisis is also an opportunity. They’re now reworking transformer designs to use different or less sought-after materials, to last longer, to include power electronics that allow the easy conversion between AC and DC, and to be more standardized and less customized than the transformers of today. Their innovations could make this critical piece of infrastructure not only more resistant to supply chain weaknesses, but also better suited to the power grids of the future.

How Transformers Work
A transformer is a simple thing—and an old one, too, invented in the 1880s. A typical one has a two-sided core made of iron or steel with copper wire wrapped around each side. The sets of wires, called windings, aren’t connected, but through electromagnetic induction across the core, current transfers from one coil to the other. By changing the number of times the wire wraps around each side of the core, engineers can change the voltage that emerges from the device so that it is higher or lower than what entered.

This basic setup underlies transformers in a wide range of sizes. An LPT can weigh as much as two blue whales and might be used to step up the electricity that emerges from a fossil fuel or nuclear power plant—typically in the thousands of volts—to match the hundreds of thousands of volts running through transmission lines. When the electricity on those lines arrives at a city, it meets a power substation, which has transformers that step down the voltage to tens of thousands of volts for local distribution. Distribution transformers, which are smaller, decrease the voltage further, eventually to the hundreds of volts that can be used safely in homes and businesses.

